Introduction
For liver transplant patients, getting infected by multi-drug resistant bacteria(MDRB) after a liver transplant is extremely dangerous. This is because MDRB can survive attacks from most drugs and so the patient cannot receive the treatment that they need. These patients, however, have to take antibiotics for a long period of time and antibiotic exposure has been found to be the main cause of MDRB. Our objective in this project is to analyze relationships between variables to get a better insight into how MDRB could occur differently for each individual under different circumstances.
Data
The three research questions introduced in the next section of the project will include the variables LTDays, Diagnosis, Severity, Diversity and Patient MDRB.
Our main focus will be on the variable, Diagnosis, which is a categorical variable that indicates the reason for the patient to get a liver transplant. (203 of the patients was diagnosed HCV, which is 50.6% of 401 stool samples).
The variable LTDays is a quantitative variable that shows the number of days between when the patient got a liver transplant and when the sample was taken. The mean value was 81 days, and the standard deviation was 126. Severity is a quantitative variable that indicates the score of severity of the liver disease. The mean was 19.8 and the standard deviation was 8.9. Diversity is another quantitative variable that indicates the diversity of the patient’s intestinal microbiome. The mean is 2.9 and the standard deviation is 0.9. Lastly, Patient MDRB is a categorical variable that indicates whether a patient had a MDRB infection within 1 year after the liver transplant. (almost 300 of stool samples had the infection, which is 75% of the 401 stool samples)
Research Scenarios
Question1: Do we have sufficient evidence that the mean of LTDays differ for given Diagnosis?
Since there are specific diagnosis categories for specific reasons for conducting a liver transplant, it seems reasonable to hypothesize that the mean of LTDays would not all be equal for the Diagnoses.
The table below illustrates a summary of LTDays by the Diagnosis
From the table above, there is some mild variation of the mean LTDays. The highest mean LTDays was for BILIARY and the lowest mean LTDays value for AIH. For AIH, the mean LTDays value deviates about 30-40 days less than the other five diagnoses so it could be considered as an outlier.
The relationship between the two variables are illustrated below, graphically.
In order to test our research question of whether the mean LTDays would differ by Diagnosis, we use the ANOVA test. This is because there are more than three categorical explanatory variables and a single quantitative response variable. The two hypotheses, the null and the alternative are listed below:
H0(null hypothesis): mu(HCV) = mu(NAFLD) = mu(AIH) = mu(BILIARY) = mu(HBV) = mu(ARLD)
The use of ANOVA test is justified because the question is about multiple means, the groups of each Diagnosis are independent since the population that have received liver transplants is extremely large. The shape condition of the F procedure is justified because the histograms for each diagnosis is not severely skewed(refer to Graph2).
Our next research question will look into whether there exists an association between Severity of the liver disease and the Diversity of patient's intestinal microbiome.
A balanced diversity in one’s intestinal microbiome is important to keep healthy. However, taking antibiotics negatively affect such a microcosm, which weakens one’s immune system. Therefore, it seems reasonable to hypothesize that the diversity of one’s intestinal microbiome would be lower for higher severity of liver disease.
The graph below shows a scatterplot and the regression line for the relationship between Severity and Diversity.
We have fully explored the data including linearity so now the focus is on the formal significance test for the regression line slope. When one is exposed to more severe diseases, the use of antibiotics may harm the diversity of the intestinal microcosm. Therefore, it seems reasonable to hypothesize that greater severity of liver disease would predict a lower diversity in intestinal microcosm.
The data reasonably validates the statistical test for linear relationship because there is a linear association in the data, and the sample size of 401 is large enough to justify the robustness of the t-distribution. In addition, the points are equally spread above and below the line.
As a result of the test, we get a p-value of approximately zero(refer to Table2). Formally, since the p-value of zero is less than the significance level that we set as 0.05, we are able to reject the null hypothesis. In context, however, we conclude that there is sufficient evidence that there is a negative linear relationship between Diversity and Severity.
We also had a related question of whether diversity in intestinal microcosm differ by the different categories of diagnosis. From the graph below, we can observe that HBV, most cases of HCV and some cases of NAFLD happen with low severity so the diversity is quite high but most cases of ARLD, some cases of NAFLD and AIH involve great severity in the liver disease. This is graphically represented in Graph4.
Graph 4. Scatterplot of Diversity against Severity color coded by Diagnosis
Question 3: Does the data give sufficient evidence that Patient MDRB differs by Diagnosis?
Our last research question will be analyzing whether Patient MDRB is associated to Diagnosis.
Since each Diagnosis relates to different intensities of severity and different amounts of diversity of intestinal microcosm, it seems reasonable to hypothesize that Patient MDRB is dependent on Diagnosis.
The contingency table below(Table4) summarizes the Patient MDRB by each Diagnosis category. Observing the table, we can see that the proportion of patients in each Diagnosis group that has MDRB varies from group to group.
In order to test our research question of whether the there is an association between the Patient MDRB and Disease, we use the Chi-Square Test for contingency tables. This is because the number of groups in the categorical explanatory variable exceed two and the response variable is also a categorical response. The two hypotheses, the null and the alternative are listed below:
H0: There is no association between Diagnosis and Patient MDRB. (equivalently, Diagnosis and Patient MDRB are independent.)
HA: There is an association between Diagnosis and Patient MDRB. (equivalently, Diagnosis and Patient MDRB are not independent)
The cell counts that are expected if the H0 was true is illustrated in the table below.
The X-squred(chi-square) statistic from this test is 36.109 and the p-value of 0.0000009034.
Formally, since the p-value is less than 0.05(the significance level that we have set), we reject the null hypothesis. In context, this means that we have sufficient evidence of an association between Diagnosis and Patient MDRB.
Discussion
This project focused on Diagnosis (reasons for getting a liver transplant) for 401 patients in the sample and observed associations with LTDays, severity, diversity and Patient MDRB. We found that there isn’t sufficient evidence to claim that there is a relationship between LTDays and Diagnosis through the ANOVA test and that observing the severity and diversity could allow us to estimate the diagnosis group that a patient could be part of. Not only that, we have found that there is an association between Diagnosis and Patient MDRB by the chi-square test. An example of a future analysis could be on identifying a relationship between Diagnosis and the type of side effects of the liver transplant so rather than indicating whether there was MDRB present of not, we could give a more detailed insight into which specific problems tend to occur.
